### Collection Ratios (Lirov)
Traditional metrics include gross and net collection ratios. Both metrics are subjective to the individual practice because they compare (often arbitrary) charges with (allowed) payments. (Net collection rate is defined as the ratio of total collections and total charges less Adjustments. Gross collection rate is defined as the ratio of total collections to total charges only.) According to the MGMA 1998 Cost Survey, adjusted fee-for-service collections (net collections) for family practices in 1997 averaged 98.65%. A declining net collection ratio may be symptomatic of increased contractual write-offs or an insufficient number of denial appeals. This metric is especially useful in the absence of modern computer technology, when it’s impossible to compare every payment with the allowed amount, or when the denial appeals process is too expensive. Otherwise, using charges in defining gross and net collection metrics precludes them from the productive discovery of process improvement opportunities.

### Collection Ratios (Reibolt)

#### Gross Charges
Gross charges, which can be considered the full Fee schedule charges, are typically all charges generated by the practice, regardless of actual reimbursement or before discounting. Although gross charges are a valid method used to determine productivity within a practice from one provider to another, they have little relationship with bottom-line performance. A practice should be careful in using gross charges as a measurement or standard of productivity because they do not reflect the revenue collected by the practice. Gross charges are valid measurements of productivity but do not reflect actual financial performance.

#### Net Charges
In comparison to the retail industry, gross charges in the medical practice are amounts brought in prior to markdowns or discounts. Net charges, however, reflect what the practice expects to collect after all markdowns or discounts are taken. Net charges reflect the true performance expectations of the medical practice after consideration of all discounts and are probably the most valid representation of productivity.

#### Gross and Net Collections
Gross and net collections reflect what is actually being brought into the practice. In many instances, a cash versus accrual basis of accounting will differentiate between gross and net collections and gross and net charges. Gross collections are those collections brought in for all professional services before any refunds or credits. Net collections are those collections realized after all refunds are considered. Depending on the context of the review, net charges and collections would be the most valid measurements of productivity, primarily because they reflect real-world results.

### Collection Ratio (Ch. 5)
One of the most telling measurements indicating the efficiency of a medical practice’s financial management is the collection ratio. Although variations of this ration are used in a variety of businesses, its determinants are unique in healthcare service entities because of the fundamental economics of their business model.

The collection ratio, also sometimes referred to as the “*gross collections ratio*,” is derived by dividing a practice’s gross charges (i.e. total amount of services billed) by its net collections (i.e., the actual amount collected.) The formula is:

Gross Charges / Net Collections = Gross Collections Ratio

The collection ratio measures the impact of a practice’s contractual Adjustments on its overall earnings. Expressed a different way, a practice’s collection ratio measures what the business brought in versus the value of services for which it ultimately billed.

In traditional business models, the collection ratio is derived by dividing a company’s total AR by its annualized revenue figure:

(AR / (Revenue / 365)) = Collection Ratio

This essentially illustrates how quickly the company collects payments for services and/or products delivered to a customer. The higher the collection ratio, the more difficulty a company is having in being paid for its services.

For companies that sell their products/services directly to consumers, this measurement is typically different because they are often paid on an immediate fee-for-service basis (i.e., consumers render at point of service.) For business-to-business companies, this can be more important because fees for services/products rendered in this model are typically invoiced, and most businesses remit payments on a monthly basis. 

Therefore, it can take 30 or more days for a company to receive payment for its services or products from another business. If that number increases dramatically, this could mean the business is having more difficult time collecting payment from its customers. The reason could range from the basic timing of cash flow fluctuations to liquidity and/or insolvency issues, the latter of which could easily result in the original business never receiving any payment for its services or products. All of this is critical when considering that business’ financial health, in addition to the fact that managers within that business must incorporate these trends into the budgeting and capital planning processes.

The collection ratio for a medical practice, however, goes beyond the basic scenario outlined above, because in addition to the general fluctuations in the business’ cash flows, there is an additional variable that most businesses do not have to consider, and that is the practice’s contractual adjustments.

### Contractual Adjustments
Although medical practices are more consumer-centered business models in nature, the presence of third-party reimbursement and contractual pricing adjustments essentially means that medical practices must operate in a business-to-business revenue model while the services model is business-to-consumer. This can double a practice’s financial stress, in that the timing of billing and collections can create cash flow challenges, in addition to the general difference between actual income derived after contractual adjustments.

Contractual adjustments refers to the values for certain services negotiated between a medical provider (individual or entity) and third party payers. Simply put, although a physician may bill a specific amount (X) for certain services or procedures, which in theory have a certain value attached, the third party payers with which the provider contracts will only actually pay a portion of that amount (X - n).

There is a fundamental economic inefficiency in this model, in that prices for health care services are not set by market forces (i.e., supply and demand) as they typically are in an open-market system. Instead, prices are set by individual contractual arrangements, which are negotiated on an even further individual basis, ultimately resulting in no real demand or pricing curve. The impact of this key inefficiency in the health care economic pricing model is a much larger issue that extends beyond the scope of this discussion; however, this concept is critical in understanding the basic profitability and degree of financial stability for any health care service business where third party payer contracts are involved.

Ultimately, a practice’s collection ratio will typically indicate how well it is collecting for services rendered - or, from the more pessimistic perspective, how significant the gap is between the value of services rendered and the actual amount paid for the same services. Collection ratios are going to range significantly among different types of practices, based on size, specialty, region, and demographic makeup of the practice’s patient base (i.e., payer mix.) Practices involving specialties where there is substantial reimbursement from Medicare and certain private insurance payers continue to watch the gap between charges and collections grow, ultimately depressing these businesses’ margins severely. 

Conversely, some practices have evolved to find new ways to expand profitability and maintain margins, despite reimbursement pressure. While it is unclear how collection ratios will evolve for practices in the long run, one thing that is certain is the need for practices to find new methods of sustaining profitability. Although there is a difference in timing of the charges being collected today versus those placed on the books at a later date, a collection ratio clearly presents a percentage of such performance relative to adjusted charges.

So, how do we know what kind of collection ratio is good for a medical practice? From an interpretive standpoint, a collection ratio of 90% is not optimal, because this essentially means that of every dime that should be coming in, only nine cents is actually collected. This means that AR is increasing, which in turn means that net working capital is decreasing. If the practice is borrowing money for working capital purposes, it may not be able to pay its physician partners the anticipated level of compensation.