---
tags: definition, him, glossary/him
alias: IDS, IDSs, Integrated Delivery System, integrated delivery system
---
# Integrated Delivery Systems (IDS)
*A network of affiliated facilities and providers working together to offer joint healthcare services to members.*

## IDS models:
### [Physician-Hospital Organization](physician-hospital-organization.md) (PHO)
A [PHO](physician-hospital-organization.md) is owned by hospitals and physician groups that work cooperatively to develop improved methods of healthcare delivery, oversee integration of physicians and hospitals into health delivery networks, assist in voluntary group formation, and collect, analyze, and disseminate information. They contract with [managed care organizations](managed-care-organization.md) or directly to employers with joint risk sharing and developing standards of care. PHOs provide an organized way for physicians and hospitals to work together on utilization management and quality improvement. They can provide administrative duties like credentialing; collaborate with managed care companies; and align incentives among physicians with establishing reimbursement and risk-sharing amounts.
### [Management Service Organization](management-service-organization.md) (MSO)
An [MSO](management-service-organization.md) is a business that provides nonclinical services to providers, like practice management services to individual physician practices. An [MSO](management-service-organization.md) may also acquire a practice’s asset and enter into agreements to provide the practice with space and/or equipment. [MSOs](management-service-organization.md) may be owned by non-healthcare provider investors, by a hospital, by a group of physicians, a joint venture between a hospital and physicians, or a health plan. An [MSO](management-service-organization.md) can provide a menu of services for providers to select from to meet their needs. These can include those stated already, and screening and hiring employees; providing office staff, billing, and coding personnel, IT personnel, in-service training, monitoring and implementing policies and procedures for coding and billing; compliance, claims submission, appeals, and [auditing](audit.md) services; and assist with managed care contracting and negotiations.
### [Group Practice Without Walls](group-practice-without-walls.md) (GPWW)
A [GPWW](group-practice-without-walls.md) is a medical practice formed to share economic risk, expenses, and marketing efforts. Physicians retain separate offices and finances. It is formed when several small practices, usually in the same specialty, trade under a common tax identification number. This allows them to jointly negotiate fees and avoid federal antitrust issues. The GPWW will have a common [Fee schedule](fee-schedule.md), standardized benefits, and equally shared ancillary service revenue. Some may incorporate other components, like centralized billing or shared management.
### [Integrated Provider Organization](integrated-provider-organization.md) (IPO)
An [IPO](integrated-provider-organization.md) is a corporate umbrella for the management of diversified healthcare delivery system. The system may include one or more hospitals, a large group practice, and other healthcare operations. Physicians practice as employees of the organization or in a closely affiliated physician group. [IPOs](integrated-provider-organization.md) can perform many services, such as evaluate new payer arrangements; evaluate and negotiate risk contracts; administer [Credentialing](credentialing.md) agreements; establish and monitor group purchasing programs; prepare annual budgets and monthly income statement and balance sheets; and review contracts.