(This is not a typo – as what some may consider managed care plans, I prefer to think of most of them as mangled care plans that get in the way of the patient-physician relationship)

It is also vital that you determine which, if any, of the managed care plans that you’re going to participate or enroll with. In most practices, it is expected and usually considered good business, to enroll with those that will enable you to see the most patients, unless those plans result in you seeing more patients – but making less money. Your local hospital will be able to tell you which plans carry most patients in your area, and this is an area that you need to be careful about. Most plans carrying a lot of the patients will try to convince you to sign contracts for the lowest amount that you’ll accept and in about 5 states (OH, PA, NY, NJ and MD and the central part of Florida), they have uncanny success at getting physicians to sign contracts for less than the Medicare allowed. We usually do not see that happening as much in places like Texas (where everyone has a license to carry a gun and those carriers are afraid of Texans).

In my opinion, signing the contracts at such a low amount is pitiful and if the physicians in these places would start saying no to the plans offering 86% of Medicare or 75% of Medicare, then those same carriers would be FORCED to start paying a decent rate.

If most of the physicians are freely willing to prostitute themselves out to the under-paying carriers, they will be forcing other physicians in their area to under-value their services and accept these contracts.

In the meantime, you may want to consider the fact that Medicare patients may be the highest payer in your area, so you may want to concentrate your practice on those patients, see less patients, give BETTER care and make more money. We are not attorneys, but we do recommend you have your own attorney read any contract you’re presented by a managed care company to sign, to protect yourself. (NOTE: Once you read the ERISA portion of the book, you will discover that much of what is contained in the managed care plan agreements do not apply to more than 80% of the claims you file to their company – although the insurance company personnel will NEVER tell you so. In fact, your own healthcare attorney is likely ignorant about this fact as well – which we will go into more detail of, later in this book.