---
tags: definition, him, glossary/him
alias: PCP, primary care provider, Primary care provider
---
# Primary Care Provider (PCP)
*A healthcare practitioner, such as a family practitioner, internist, or pediatrician who is chosen by an individual to provide continuous medical care, trained to treat a wide variety of health-related problems.*

Upon joining a [ HMO](health-maintenance-organization.md), a member chooses a primary care provider, or PCP. This provider, sometimes called a [Gatekeeper](gatekeeper.md), is responsible for providing a broad range of routine services. Their duty is to manage the member’s treatment, as they are responsible for the member’s healthcare decisions and referrals to other facilities (for example, inpatient admissions), in-network specialists, or out-of-network specialists when necessary. They are the group member’s primary contact with the health plan. Most plans require a referral, or the member is responsible for the cost of treatment. Each covered member of a family may choose a different PCP. A PCP is usually a family or general medicine provider, an internal medicine provider, or a pediatrician. PCPs are the entry point for almost all the group member’s healthcare needs. They provide disease prevention, health promotion, health maintenance, counseling, patient education, and diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic illnesses.

## Role of Primary Care Provider / [Gatekeeper](gatekeeper.md)
Primary care physicians (PCP) and other providers play a vital role in patient care. They provide consistency of care for their patients, reduce unnecessary hospitalizations, reduce complications due to chronic illnesses, and provide health education to their patients, among other services. A [Gatekeeper](gatekeeper.md) is a physician—typically a primary care physician, like a family practitioner, internist, or pediatrician—who is responsible for determining a patient’s primary services and coordinating care so that the patient receives the appropriate needed services. The [Gatekeeper](gatekeeper.md) is in charge of all of the covered members’ healthcare lives, managing their total care. Without access to primary care providers, people will over-utilize emergency departments and urgent care centers, which overburdens those systems. It also does not provide consistency and follow-through of care. Patients without primary care providers may not receive preventive care and screenings that may uncover a condition or disease needing treatment. Access to good primary care helps patients live better, longer, and healthier lives.